---
layout: post
title:  "If you are a programmer who wants to change the world, consider biology"
date:   2022-03-12 21:34:02 -0500
type: posts
categories: biology
---

This post is an attempt at convincing you that if you are:
* Good at programming
* Want to change the world

Then you should consider learning biology. To be more specific, you should consider applying 
everything you've learnt and will learn into biology-leaning applications. 
What if you are not a computer science major? This post is applicable toward STEM majors
and liberal arts majors as well, but the bulk of it will be about programming.
Also, because I am based in the United States, the majority of arguments will be 
made using U.S. data. Please provide your argument in the comments about how this 
applied to your countries.

This blog post will be divided into several segments:
* Why biology may appeal to you, a programmer
* Programming can solve many of biology greatest questions
* Why it might not be a bad financial play after all
* How can I help

Note: the name of this blog could as well be "Why you, a biologist, should learn programming."
However, if you are a biologist, chances are you already learned some programming skills.

# Because you can have immediate impact

Your personal impact within a field is potentially dependent on two components:

* How many problems your skillset can solve exist within that field?
* How many individuals with your skillset work in that field?

For someone who knows programming in biology, the answers to those two questions 
are respectively *a lot* and *too little*. This means that if you are planning
to use your skillset in programming toward biology, there is a good chance your
contribution might make immediate impact. 

## The hammers and the nails

You probably know DNA is the reason why you look like your parents, and why your parents
look like your grandparents and their ancestors. DNA is a large molecule that contains
two backbones and two linked "sequences." The sequences are composed of four types of 
bases/letters G, T, C, and A. It was the ordering of these four bases that code for everything 
that makes you, from the basics like how your heart works or how your thumbs are smaller
than your fingers, to the uniques like your eye color or your allergies. Extracting the
sequence of DNA in human has been the goal of biologists for a very long time. The first
multinational project to sequence the entire human genome started in 1990. But sequencing
DNA is not the same as reading binary lines on a computer line. DNA is extremely small and
extremly compact: the human genome has 3 billion base pairs in total, squeezed into a space
only 6 out of 1000 of a milimeter. No microscope was capable of making out the shape of the 
base pair, let alone reading what base it is. 

Fortunately, sequencing machines back then can
read the base pair of segments several thousands letters long through chemical methods. 
So the approach was as follow: divide the human genome into small segments, use the sequencing
machines to produce results, then combine these results together. Sounding simple on the surface,
the implementations were nowhere near it. Various algorithms were brought in from mathematics
and computer science to find the best ways to reconstruct sequences. On an organizational scale,
a larger problem emerged: each research lab was sequencing DNA in a different manner, producing
results that are extremely hard to combine. Imagine working on a puzzle with billion of pieces with
thousands of other people, and imagine the difficulty of keeping track of where the puzzles has been
finished. By the mid-1990s, it was entirely unsure if progresses were going well given the state
of mismatch between different labs across the continents.

Then came a rescue from the programming field. Less than a decade ago, a programmer for NASA
created a new programming language called Perl to make text processing easier. 
As it happens, genome sequencing uses a lot of text. Not just the DNA letters themselves,
but also annotations, comments, and bibilographies. Ease of learning and writing helps a lot, too.
The language quickly catched onto the genome sequencing project as a way to help research labs
produce programs that are easily sharable. Perl stays as a programming language of choice for
many bioinformatics researchers, thanks in no part to its powerful text processing abilities. 

This brings to me the point I want to make: The world of computer science and programming 
are rich with advanced tools. The world of biology, on the other hand, are rich with 
problems that advanced tools can solve. If you, a programmer, want to contribute to biology,
you can see yourself creating solutions that speed up current research much, much more. You
can find existing computational methods and adapt them to biology applications, or you
can help develop something as simple as new software to faciliate collaborations between scientists.
Rest assure, building these systems might sound simple in your field, but they are far from
obvious in research facilities.

Sometimes, the skillsets of computer scientists may produce results that outperformed 
that of biologists. We have talked about DNA. In living organisms, if DNA are the blueprints,
molecules called proteins are the gears that drive the biological machines. There are
approximately more than 100,000 different types of proteins in the human body. The 3-dimensional
structures of the protein, also called their foldings, are of great importances in understanding
how they interact with other molecules. In 2018, a team of computer scientists from the 
machine learning research company DeepMind produced a program called AlphaFold to predict
the 3-D structures of proteins. A second iteration of their program finished clear first 
in a protein folding prediction competition and drew massive attentions from the scientific community.
While protein folding was far from solved, what DeepMind accomplished was decades beyond 
predictions; it cracks the code for many, many different types of proteins. The most fascinating
aspect, however, came from the fact that AlphaFold 2 was built with state of the art tools in 
machine learning and computer science fields such as transformers networks. It was an extremly
powerful hammer, and protein folding was the nail.

## Double Threats
> [..] if you want something extraordinary, you have two paths:
> 1) Become the best at one specific thing.
> 2) Become very good (top 25%) at two or more things.
> - Scott Adams -

There are many people who are good at programming. There are also many people who
are good at biology. But it is rare to find someone knowledgable in both. Let's quickly
look at how many people who work in programming-based occupations to get a sense of number [^ 1]:

[^ 1]: Source: [Bureau of Labor](https://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/computer-and-information-research-scientists.htm#tab-8)

| Occupation | Number of jobs |
| --- | ----------- |
| Computer and Information Systems Managers |  	482,000 |
| Hardware Engineers | 66,200 |
| Network Architects | 165,200 |
| Computer Programmers | 185,700 |
| Systems Analysts | 607,800 |
| Database Administrators | 168,000 |
| Information Security Analysts | 141,200 |
| Computer Systems Administrators | 350,300 |
| Software Developers | 1,847,900 |
| Web Developers | 199,400 |
| Computer Research Scientists | 33,000 |
| **Total** | 4,246,700 |

Now, let's look at how many people work in biology or health-related occupations:

| Occupation | Number of jobs |
| --- | ----------- |
| Biochemists and biophysicists | 34,800 |
| Biological Technicians | 87,600 |
| Laboratory Technologists | 335,500 |
| Medical Scientists | 133,900 |
| Microbiologists | 21,400 |
| Physicians | 727,000 |
| Pharmacists | 322,200 |
| **Total** | 1,662,400 |

That is almost 2.5 times less than the amount of people work in programming jobs already.
Excluding physicians and pharmacists, the number drop down to 613,200, or 7 times less
than the amount of people who work in programming. Finally, how many people can we estimate
to be good in both fields? The only interdisciplinary bachelors degree I can found 
that educate ones to be an expert in both seems to be biomedical engineering, which has the 
following number:   

| Occupation | Number of jobs |
| --- | ----------- |
| Bioengineers | 19,300 |

I hope I convey my points. There are far less people work in biology than people who program,
and there are far, far less people who can program well work in biology. Bringing your skills
to biology means that you have a chance to become a so-called "double threat" per Scott Adams.
This is not just about your chances for good employments--it is also about your chance to 
actually make a difference to the world. Given the large number of unsolved problems in biology, 
you have the potential to contribute to something really important and world changing. Could it
be contributing to an (open-source model of cancer)[https://www.nature.com/articles/491S62a]? Or 
could it be writing a (Python library to help CRISPR research)[https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-40896-w]?
But what if you are not highly motivated by purpose, but rather financial? Rest assure that
bringing your skills into biology might not be a bad financial play, because...

# Bio is the new tech

Jobs that require programming skills are amongst the highest-paying jobs. 
Simply put, if you live in the United States and dedicate 
yourself toward becoming a software engineer, you can get a job that pays you more 
than $100,000 in annual salary. And if you manage to get yourself into a big public tech company
(The most famous ones are called Big Five, which include Facebook/Meta, Google/Alphabet,
Amazon, Apple, and Microsoft), your stock bonus can push your salary up beyond $200,000
right out of college. [A survey of computer scientists at top schools](https://www.businessinsider.com/top-companies-ivy-league-computer-science-graduates-most-want-to-work-2018-6)
reveals that the top companies they want to work for are big names like Apple, Microsoft, Google,
and Amazon. So, if you have a solid background in programming, why should you dedicate your
skills toward less profitable applications in biology?

It's because biology is the new tech. In fact, there are many parallels between the current state of
biology, and the state of computers at the beginning of the 1970s. Remember mainframes? They were
gigantic computers that take up a section of a room. Take a look at [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wIjgZhAjQS4)
to see how spreadsheet were done back in the day. Back in those time, computers were expensive,
and their main customers were companies and research facilities. Then, a small and inexpensive computer called
the Altair 8800 was released. It was the most influential personal computer of all time;
its existence inspired a duo from California named Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak to release their
own peronsal computers called the Apple I. It also launched the careers of software developers Bill Gates
and Paul Allen, who made intepreter for the Altair 8800. The rest, as people say, is history. 
Personal computing didn't just launch the careers of Apple and Microsoft, it launched the careers of
millions of others and the development of the internet as well.

If we look at the state of biology research today, we found that there is a similar transformation
underway. Biology research has mostly been done in research labs with million-dollar fundings and
teams of PhD. But now, a series of innovations in basic research might upend everything:

* Remember the DNA sequencing story earlier? The entire human genome project was finished in 2003,
took 13 years to complete, and cost $3 billion. The cost of sequencing genome dropped dramatically
since then. You might be familiar with Moore's law, which predicted that integrated circuits
will continue to be denser. Geneticists are using a similar analogy toward genome sequencing,
and predicted that the cost of genome sequencing will become exponentially lower over time. 
It was the lowering costs that led to the creation of many gene sequencing companies such as 
(23andMe)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/23andMe] or (Ancestry.com)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancestry.com].

* **CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing** was a method of modifying the DNA with much higher accuracy and
lower cost than previous methods. How low-cost are we talking about? Low enough that you
can mail-order it and (do your own CRISPR experiments at home)[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XLJqDXewAjM].
In fact, similar to the HomeBrew club of computer hardware tinkerers in the 1970s, there
is a subculture of biohackers who are willing to perform biomedical experiments in their
homes, even on (themselves)[https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/2019/6/25/18682583/biohacking-transhumanism-human-augmentation-genetic-engineering-crispr].

[Figure]

Any technological revolution is preempted by decades of basic science. For biology,
while it may seems that basic science research are still underway, you may not want to
miss it in the next decade when the biotech revolution gets into full gear. Leaders in 
software technology surely saw the trends as well: Fundings for synthetic biology -- 
developing new biological organisms -- burgeoned from $10 billion 10 years ago, 
to almost $50 billion in 2018. Here is just a quick list of some companies that receive fundings
from the like of Bill Gates, Jerry Yang, and Eric Schmidt:
* Bolt Threads, which engineer microbes to produce synthetic silks
* Upside Foods, which grow real meats from cell cultures
* Editas Medicine, which uses CRIPSR-Cas9 editing therapy to treat rare genetic diseases
* Lygos, which engineer microbes to convert sugar into industrial products


# What should I do?

I hope that this long essay was enough to convince you about the merits of using
your skills in programming to apply toward biology. But how should you start? 
Not everyone who works in biology and biotech started the same, but here are some
general ideas you can consider:

* **Learn.** I recommend you start with [A Computer Scientist's Guide to Cell Biology]
(https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-0-387-48278-1). It explains biochemical processes
in a simple and approachable way. Learn about [DNA, RNA, and proteins](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KIvBn6gfRgY&list=PLbKSbFnKYVY3GmRofoqKNtmB2_PckhrLX).
Familiarized yourself with [evolution and natural selection](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GcjgWov7mTM&list=PLSQl0a2vh4HAFSBOyOBNxUM0V-bCifPks).
Then, if you want to specialize, learn about topics that interests you such as the
[immune system](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z3M0vU3Dv8E) or 
[behavioral biology](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNnIGh9g6fA&list=PLMwddpZ_3nkAWijQlBnkwnr9wfcuderVe).
Biology is a large field. Take your time.

* **Experiment.** Ask to work for a biomedical research lab. If it was good enough for 
[Eric Lander](https://www.broadinstitute.org/directors-page/about-eric-lander-biographical-information)
or [Richard Feynman](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/oscillator/feynman-on-biology/),
it certainly was good for you as a place to start. If you really want to get yourself a leg up,
consider a postgraduate degree in biology-related fields as well.

* **Apply.** If you are already working in a programming career, try to look around for 
places you can apply to. You can look at bioinformatics, biotech, or genetics companies. 

* **Educate.** Write blogs about what you have learned. Tell your friends and families
about how biology works. Make videos about it. 
There is a crisis in the United States when it comes to medicinal and healthcare education right now.
If you can help with education, you are already changing the world. 

# Conclusion: The charms of biology
> [...]So right away I found out something about biology: 
it was very easy to find a question that was very interesting, 
and that nobody knew the answer to. In physics you had to go 
a little deeper before you could find an interesting question that people didn't know.
- Richard Feynman -

The first essay that truly convinced me about the beauty of biology was James Somers' 
[I should have loved biology](https://jsomers.net/i-should-have-loved-biology/). 
It shows me that biology is the study of extremly complicated and mysterious mechanism that happen
all around us. Within the mysteries also lie the charms. You may need to learn extra 
backgrounds to understand the importance of an unifying theory between general 
relativity and gravity, or the roadblocks toward feasible quantum computing, but 
studying aging and you will find more than 300 different theories on how and why
the most inevitable biological pocess even occurs [^ 1]. As a programmer, you likely learned
thigs from first principle: a simple model or mathematical equation, then scaling up
to adapt toward your needs. In biology, anything you encounter is often extremly complex,
that any first-principle models would not be sufficient enough. 

[^ 1]: Source [Viña et al.](https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1080/15216540601178067)

The charms of biology comes from the fact that studying [biology is akin to 
study advanced technology from a different civilization](https://berthub.eu/articles/posts/immune-system/).
The eukaryotic cell is the most complex nano-machine in the known universe. 
Nothing human has made compared to it in terms of abilities, and I will not be surprised 
if a hundred years from now we still haven't come close. 
We are talking about a collection 
of molecules, typically 0.01 to 0.1mm in diameter, that is capable of maintaining homeostasis,
participating in feedback loops, communicating dangers, making replicas of
itself, and differentiating from a single stem cell.
Seriously, think about it, how do you go design a machine that can replicate itself
into *different* copies of itself, the same way a single fertilized egg replicate and differentiate
into a full human? How can the cell know where it is to differentiate correctly? 
And have I mentioned that it is so small you can fit 5 million of them within a single drop of water?
And yet, the biological cells still has some glaring flaws: It multiplies itself up until an 
inevitable point, where the collective multicellular organism decides to [stop growing and start dying]
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Senescence).
It sometimes produce rouge copies of itself; these rouge copies can end up overwhelm
the original cells and [take over the entire organism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metastasis).
It was those somewhat glaring flaws that lead to some to even question if *they were really flaws,
or did [they actually serve something beyond our understanding?]* 
(https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/did-cancer-evolve-to-protect-us/)  

There are many reasons why you, a programmer, should consider biology. 
I have laid out my arguments that you can make an far greater impact on the world if
you use your skills in a disciplinary fashion, that you are on a cusp of a biotechnology
revolution. But in case these haven't convinced you enough, this last section 
was the reason why I considered biology: because it is extremly fascinating.

 
